[Blog] Alerts Use Cases (#10147)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/alerts-examples.mdx

Reviewer: I think you could also add a backlink here: https://posthog.com/docs/product-analytics/tutorials

---
title: 'Never miss changes to your key metrics: 5 alerts you can use'
date: 2025-01-07
author:
 - bijan-boustani
rootpage: /blog
category: General
tags:
  - Alerts
  - Product updates
---

To keep life interesting, it's important to live in a state of perpetual ignorance. When things are going well, there's no need to find out why. When things go downhill, let anxiety run its course. After all, who needs data and insights when you have hope?

> ![Driving blind](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/319051_c8e072f85e.gif)

Reviewer: Does putting this in a `<ProductScreenshot>` center it?

Author: I tried this out as a `ProductScreenshot` but it doesn't center the image and looked a little weird with the extra border. I ended up reverting the change since I think most of our meme images use Markdown images.

An alternative, more effective approach is to use [PostHog alerts](/docs/alerts) to get notified when important metrics change.

Alerts will send you an email notification when an insight crosses a threshold that you specify, such as an absolute value (e.g. pageviews exceeded 1,000), or a relative amount (e.g. conversion rate increased by 10%).

> We'll start with how to set up a new alert. And then we'll share some ideas for how you can use alerts, so you're never caught out again.

Reviewer: Don't think this needs to be a sentence fragment
```suggestion
We'll start with how to set up a new alert and then we'll share some ideas for how you can use alerts, so you're never caught out again.
```

- **Frequency:** Set how often you want to check the alert threshold (hourly, daily, weekly, monthly).

- **Who to notify:** Select who should receive an email when the alert is triggered.

<ProductScreenshot
    imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/filled_alert_627158e6bb.png"
    imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/alert_people_dark_0ccd7611bd.png"
    alt="filled alert"
    classes="rounded"
/>

Then, click **Create alert** and you'll see the new alert:

<ProductScreenshot
    imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/insight_alerts_5k_daef47ade1.png"
    imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/created_alert_dark_1710da74dc.png"
    alt="insight alerts"
    classes="rounded"
/>

For a more detailed walkthrough, you can also check out our [Alerts docs](/docs/alerts), which we'll update as we add new features.

## Practical uses for alerts

Now that we can create alerts, let's take a look at a handful of practical examples.

### 1. Get alerts when traffic spikes

> Want to investigate spikes in traffic to your website? Monitoring the traffic to your website can help you measure the success of marketing campaigns and understand which activities drive the most visitors to your site.
> 
> These kinds of alerts can also be useful when traffic spikes are unexpected. We often see this at PostHog when our content gets featured in a popular email newsletter or shared on Hacker News. When we notice an influx of new signups, it can be fun to dig in and try to figure out where they came from.

Reviewer: I think: 

> Want to investigate spikes in traffic to your website? Monitoring the traffic to your website can help you measure the success of marketing campaigns and understand which activities drive the most visitors to your site.

is a use case for normal insights where traffic spikes is a good use case for alerts. 

```suggestion
Traffic spike alerts are useful when this happens unexpectedly. We often see this at PostHog when our content gets featured in a popular email newsletter or shared on Hacker News. When we notice an influx of new signups, it can be fun to dig in and try to figure out where they came from.
```

Alerts can also be used to check for the _absence_ of something happening.

For example, PostHog tracks the number of transactional billing emails that get sent out every day. If these emails aren't getting sent, it would be a big deal.

![Ignoring warnings](https://frinkiac.com/video/S08E23/XOUcScbq8W_7yoA6nti16cCC31A=.gif)

To do something similar, you can track events when you trigger transactional emails. Then, create an insight to track the number of emails sent every day.

Then, we can set up an alert called "No billing events sent" that gets triggered when the transactional emails have a value less than 1. In other words, it will trigger the alert if no emails get sent.

<ProductScreenshot
    imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/transactional_email_alert_light_57017a6227.png"
    imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/transactional_email_alert_dark_1fda09248e.png"
    alt="Billing email alert"
    classes="rounded"
/>

We can set the frequency to check this daily. And for critical alerts like this, you can add more than one email to the notification list and ensure the entire billing team receives the alert.

> ### 4. Alert on changes in conversion rates

Reviewer: Instead of having two separate lines could we use formula mode here? Might be more realistic.

To set alerts when your conversion rate changes, you can set up an insight that tracks signups on your pricing page.

> For example, we can create a trend insight filtered for our pricing pageviews and our [`user_signed_up` event](/docs/getting-started/send-events#2-capture-custom-events), which is triggered whenever a user completes our signup flow and creates their account.
> So this insight will display a graph with a line for the number of pageviews for the pricing page as well as a separate line for the number of users that signed up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For example, we can create a trend insight filtered for our pricing pageviews and our [`user_signed_up` event](/docs/getting-started/send-events#2-capture-custom-events), which is triggered whenever a user completes our signup flow and creates their account.

So this insight will display a graph with a line for the number of pageviews for the pricing page as well as a separate line for the number of users that signed up.
```

<ProductScreenshot
    imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/mutliple_alerts_light_a45b5f0ad9.png"
    imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/mutliple_alerts_dark_1d37e0e9b9.png"
    alt="Multiple alerts"
    classes="rounded"
/>

### 5. Alert on breakdown in referral sources

We also have the ability to trigger alerts on trends with breakdowns. For example, you can track all the traffic to your website broken down by the referral source (e.g. google, substack, direct).

If there's a major change in where the traffic is coming from, we want to trigger an alert. Traffic could surge from a new source, or an existing source of traffic could disappear, even if the overall traffic remains the same.

Here's an example where we set up an alert when any of those breakdown values increases by 10% or more:

<ProductScreenshot
    imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/breakdown_light_a6de1bd240.png"
    imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/breakdown_dark_5d2300b6cd.png"
    alt="Breakdown alerts"
    classes="rounded"
/>

> > 📝 Note: For trends with a breakdown, the alert will fire if _any_ of the breakdown values breaches the threshold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 📝 **Note:** For trends with a breakdown, the alert will fire if _any_ of the breakdown values breaches the threshold.
```
